---
layout: draft
title: Fedora cures my distro-hopping itch
date: 2024-07-02 12:00:00 +1000
categories: linux fedora fun
comments: true
---

# Fedora cures my distro-hopping itch (for now)

## A bit of history

I bet every software developer at some stage of their career has noticed there is this fantastic open source world called
Linux. At some point, they may think that what is it like to use Linux as their daily driver. I am no exception. I had
been trying Linux from time to time since days way back to my university years. I had tried Ubuntu, Fedora, Arch, and OpenSUSE,
just to name a few.

Back in the old days when things were not as polished as today, Linux was a bit of a pain to use, a lot of fidling with
the terminal, and a lot guess-work of what could be going wrong. Only until recent years, when Ubuntu introduced a lot of
user-friendly features such as third party driver installers, and a lot of GUI tools to manage the system, Linux became
more accessible to the general public. And this trend continues. I do get that a lot of die-hard Linux fans would argue that
Linux should always stay open source and be skeptical about the use of proprietary software, but I think otherwise. This
trend shows that Linux is becoming more mainstream and more people are using it. As more people are using it, more software
vendors are willing to develop software for Linux. This is a win-win situation for everyone. So a bit of proprietary software
is not a bad thing, and you can always choose not to use it.

I have been on and off Linux as my daily driver for a while mainly because some software that I use for work is not available
or not as well supported in Linux, which causes frustration. Having said that, even on Windows, I use WSL (Windows Subsystem
for Linux) a lot, which is a well integrated Linux VM running on Windows. I really need to give kudos to Microsoft for this
feature and it does show that the company is embracing open source. On macOS, I use docker and basically all the unix/linux
tools that I need for work. So, for Windows and macOS, if I need to use one sentence to describe my experience, it would be
"it just works". I can easily recommend to anyone who wants to develop software to use either Windows or macOS.

However, Windows updating strategy is too invasive and microsoft is constantly pushing ads to me, and all the privacy issues
just concern me as an end user. If you follow the news, you probably find that Microsoft is working on something fancy
called "Copilot + PC". I love technology, and I am forward-thinking in terms of the use of AI. But I am skeptical about
having a feature in my personal machine to have the ability of "seeing" and "remembering" every action I take with my computer.
Even though this is, for now, an opt-in feature for capable PCs, I still rather to have an option to opt-out completely ----
not to have any code of that feature exist in my machine. Microsoft calling this feature "recall" is simply the worst
naming choice ever in my opinion. It is set for failure from the beginning. I am sorry, Microsoft, face the reality.

On the other hand, Apple is introducing some AI features in macOS and it at least, on the surface, seems less invasive.
But, I will remain skeptical until I see how it actually works. So, it would be nice to have a backup plan, an alternative,
if both Windows and macOS are not working for me. And that is where I explored Linux again.

## 2024 Linux Desktop experience

If you follow Linux Desktop news, you probably know quite a few DE (Desktop Environment) are available. The famous ones
are KDE, GNOME, Cinnamon, and XFCE. I have tried all of them from the past, and I have to say, XFCE had been my favourite
for so many years. It is lightweight, fast, and it worked smoothly on old hardware, but it is not as visually appealing 
as options.

2024 is the year of Wayland. Wayland is a new display server protocol that aims to replace X11. It is more secure, more
efficient, and more modern. My previous experience with Wayland was not great. It was buggy, and it broke a lot of things.
You can find a lot of complaints about Wayland on the internet. And part of the reason I quit Linux as my daily driver was
because Xorg does not support fractional scaling and multi-monitor setup well and Wayland was not stable enough for
me to use. But, in 2024, Wayland has matured a lot and I see a lot of support for it in the Linux community. So, I decided
to give it a try and I had made up a list of requirements for my daily driver:

- Fractional scaling support
- Multi-monitor setup support
- HiDPI support
  - Chromium/Chrome
  - VSCode
  - Pycharm
- Sleep/suspend works
- Bluetooth/Wifi works
- Mouse with extra buttons works
- Nvidia GPU works

Some nice to have features:

- A smooth and visually appealing DE
- Fewer random crashes
- A good dictionary
- A good PDF reader

I did some research and found that Fedora is a good distro to try as it seems to have obtained the balance between
stability and new features. I had tried Fedora before and quite liked its package manager, dnf, although previously I
was not able to fully resolve some suspend issues. So I downloaded Fedora 40 KDE Spin and installed it on my desktop
and dual-booted it with Windows 11. It was a smooth installation process and I was able to boot into Fedora without any
issues. Then I started to install Nvidia drivers, although a bit of a pain, I was able to get it working. Then, I needed
to resolve some suspend issues I previously and anticipated that it would come again. To my surprise, suspend issue can be
avoided by setting an option for the Nvidia kernel module (to preserve memory). So far, the experience had been great.